README.md, before:

Create BridgeDB Identity Mapping files for HMDB
===============================================

This groovy script creates a Derby file for BridgeDB [1] for use in PathVisio,
etc.

The script has been tested with HMDB 3.6 [2], ChEBI 150, and Wikidata from June 2016.

I'm indebted to all that worked on identifier mappings in these projects:

- http://hmdb.ca/
- http://www.ebi.ac.uk/chebi/
- http://wikidata.org/

Everyone can contribute ID mappings to the latter project.

![](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/c/cd/Wikidata_stamp.png/288px-Wikidata_stamp.png)

Releases
--------

The files are released via the BridgeDb Website: http://www.bridgedb.org/mapping-databases/hmdb-metabolite-mappings/

The mapping files are also archived on Figshare: https://figshare.com/search?q=metabolite+bridgedb+mapping+database&quick=1

License
-------

This repository: New BSD.

Derby License -> http://db.apache.org/derby/license.html
BridgeDB License -> http://www.bridgedb.org/browser/trunk/LICENSE-2.0.txt

Run the script
--------------

1. add the jars to your classpath, e.g. on Linux with:

  export CLASSPATH=\`ls -1 *.jar | tr '\n' ':'\`

2. make sure the HMDB data file is saved as hmdb_metabolites.zip

  ```
  wget http://www.hmdb.ca/system/downloads/current/hmdb_metabolites.zip
  ```

3. make sure the ChEBI data file is saved

  ```
  mkdir data
  cd data
  wget ftp://ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/chebi/Flat_file_tab_delimited/names.tsv.gz
  gunzip names.tsv.gz
  mv names.tsv chebi_names.tsv
  wget ftp://ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/chebi/Flat_file_tab_delimited/database_accession.tsv
  mv database_accession.tsv chebi_database_accession.tsv
  ```

4. make sure the Wikidata file is saved

Run the following SPARQL queries at http://query.wikidata.org/ and save the
output as CSV files [3]:

4.1 CAS registry numbers

SPARQL query of which the output is to be saved as "cas2wikidata.csv":

  ```
  PREFIX wdt: <http://www.wikidata.org/prop/direct/>
  SELECT ?compound ?id WHERE {
    ?compound wdt:P231 ?id .
  }
  ```

4.2 ChemSpider

SPARQL query of which the output is to be saved as "cs2wikidata.csv":

  ```
  PREFIX wdt: <http://www.wikidata.org/prop/direct/>
  SELECT ?compound ?id WHERE {
    ?compound wdt:P661 ?id .
  }
  ```

4.3 PubChem CIDs

SPARQL query of which the output is to be saved as "pubchem2wikidata.csv":

  ```
  PREFIX wdt: <http://www.wikidata.org/prop/direct/>
  SELECT ?compound ?id WHERE {
    ?compound wdt:P662 ?id .
  }
  ```

4.4 KEGG compound IDs

SPARQL query of which the output is to be saved as "kegg2wikidata.csv":

  ```
  PREFIX wdt: <http://www.wikidata.org/prop/direct/>
  SELECT ?compound ?id WHERE {
    ?compound wdt:P665 ?id .
  }
  ```

4.5 KnAPSaCK IDs

SPARQL query of which the output is to be saved as "ksnapsack2wikidata.csv":

  ```
  PREFIX wdt: <http://www.wikidata.org/prop/direct/>
  SELECT ?compound ?id WHERE {
    ?compound wdt:P2064 ?id .
  }
  ```

4.6 LIPIDMAP IDs

SPARQL query of which the output is to be saved as "lm2wikidata.csv":

  ```
  PREFIX wdt: <http://www.wikidata.org/prop/direct/>
  SELECT ?compound ?id WHERE {
    ?compound wdt:P2063 ?id .
  }
  ```

4.7 HMDB IDs

SPARQL query of which the output is to be saved as "hmdb2wikidata.csv":

  ```
  PREFIX wdt: <http://www.wikidata.org/prop/direct/>
  SELECT ?compound ?id WHERE {
    ?compound wdt:P2057 ?id .
  }
  ```

4.8 ChEBI IDs

SPARQL query of which the output is to be saved as "chebi2wikidata.csv":

  ```
  PREFIX wdt: <http://www.wikidata.org/prop/direct/>
  SELECT ?compound ?id WHERE {
    ?compound wdt:P683 ?id .
  }
  ```

4.9 Get compound labels

SPARQL query of which the output is to be downloaded as simple TSV and saved as "names4wikidata.tsv":

  ```
  PREFIX wdt: <http://www.wikidata.org/prop/direct/>
  SELECT ?compound ?key ?name WHERE {
    ?compound wdt:P31 wd:Q11173 .
    OPTIONAL {
      ?compound rdfs:label ?name
      FILTER((LANG(?name)) = "en")
    }
    OPTIONAL {
      ?compound wdt:P235 ?key
    }
  }
  ```

5. run the script with Groovy:

  groovy hmdb2derby.groovy

6. open the file in PathVisio

References
----------

1. http://bridgedb.org/
2. http://hmdb.ca/
3. https://chem-bla-ics.blogspot.nl/2015/12/new-edition-getting-cas-registry.html

Commit message:

Added a single command to do the SPARQL query and save to file

README.md, after:

Create BridgeDB Identity Mapping files for HMDB
===============================================

This groovy script creates a Derby file for BridgeDB [1] for use in PathVisio,
etc.

The script has been tested with HMDB 3.6 [2], ChEBI 150, and Wikidata from June 2016.

I'm indebted to all that worked on identifier mappings in these projects:

- http://hmdb.ca/
- http://www.ebi.ac.uk/chebi/
- http://wikidata.org/

Everyone can contribute ID mappings to the latter project.

![](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/c/cd/Wikidata_stamp.png/288px-Wikidata_stamp.png)

Releases
--------

The files are released via the BridgeDb Website: http://www.bridgedb.org/mapping-databases/hmdb-metabolite-mappings/

The mapping files are also archived on Figshare: https://figshare.com/search?q=metabolite+bridgedb+mapping+database&quick=1

License
-------

This repository: New BSD.

Derby License -> http://db.apache.org/derby/license.html
BridgeDB License -> http://www.bridgedb.org/browser/trunk/LICENSE-2.0.txt

Run the script
--------------

1. add the jars to your classpath, e.g. on Linux with:

  export CLASSPATH=\`ls -1 *.jar | tr '\n' ':'\`

2. make sure the HMDB data file is saved as hmdb_metabolites.zip

  ```
  wget http://www.hmdb.ca/system/downloads/current/hmdb_metabolites.zip
  ```

3. make sure the ChEBI data file is saved

  ```
  mkdir data
  cd data
  wget ftp://ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/chebi/Flat_file_tab_delimited/names.tsv.gz
  gunzip names.tsv.gz
  mv names.tsv chebi_names.tsv
  wget ftp://ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/chebi/Flat_file_tab_delimited/database_accession.tsv
  mv database_accession.tsv chebi_database_accession.tsv
  ```

4. make sure the Wikidata file is saved

Run the following SPARQL queries at http://query.wikidata.org/ and save the
output as CSV files [3]:

4.1 CAS registry numbers

SPARQL query of which the output is to be saved as "cas2wikidata.csv":

  ```
  PREFIX wdt: <http://www.wikidata.org/prop/direct/>
  SELECT ?compound ?id WHERE {
    ?compound wdt:P231 ?id .
  }
  ```

With curl the following command can be run:

  ```
  curl -i -H "Accept: text/csv" --data-urlencode query@wikidata/cas.rq -G https://query.wikidata.org/bigdata/namespace/wdq/sparql -o cas2wikidata.csv  
  ```

4.2 ChemSpider

SPARQL query of which the output is to be saved as "cs2wikidata.csv":

  ```
  PREFIX wdt: <http://www.wikidata.org/prop/direct/>
  SELECT ?compound ?id WHERE {
    ?compound wdt:P661 ?id .
  }
  ```

4.3 PubChem CIDs

SPARQL query of which the output is to be saved as "pubchem2wikidata.csv":

  ```
  PREFIX wdt: <http://www.wikidata.org/prop/direct/>
  SELECT ?compound ?id WHERE {
    ?compound wdt:P662 ?id .
  }
  ```

4.4 KEGG compound IDs

SPARQL query of which the output is to be saved as "kegg2wikidata.csv":

  ```
  PREFIX wdt: <http://www.wikidata.org/prop/direct/>
  SELECT ?compound ?id WHERE {
    ?compound wdt:P665 ?id .
  }
  ```

4.5 KnAPSaCK IDs

SPARQL query of which the output is to be saved as "ksnapsack2wikidata.csv":

  ```
  PREFIX wdt: <http://www.wikidata.org/prop/direct/>
  SELECT ?compound ?id WHERE {
    ?compound wdt:P2064 ?id .
  }
  ```

4.6 LIPIDMAP IDs

SPARQL query of which the output is to be saved as "lm2wikidata.csv":

  ```
  PREFIX wdt: <http://www.wikidata.org/prop/direct/>
  SELECT ?compound ?id WHERE {
    ?compound wdt:P2063 ?id .
  }
  ```

4.7 HMDB IDs

SPARQL query of which the output is to be saved as "hmdb2wikidata.csv":

  ```
  PREFIX wdt: <http://www.wikidata.org/prop/direct/>
  SELECT ?compound ?id WHERE {
    ?compound wdt:P2057 ?id .
  }
  ```

4.8 ChEBI IDs

SPARQL query of which the output is to be saved as "chebi2wikidata.csv":

  ```
  PREFIX wdt: <http://www.wikidata.org/prop/direct/>
  SELECT ?compound ?id WHERE {
    ?compound wdt:P683 ?id .
  }
  ```

4.9 Get compound labels

SPARQL query of which the output is to be downloaded as simple TSV and saved as "names4wikidata.tsv":

  ```
  PREFIX wdt: <http://www.wikidata.org/prop/direct/>
  SELECT ?compound ?key ?name WHERE {
    ?compound wdt:P31 wd:Q11173 .
    OPTIONAL {
      ?compound rdfs:label ?name
      FILTER((LANG(?name)) = "en")
    }
    OPTIONAL {
      ?compound wdt:P235 ?key
    }
  }
  ```

5. run the script with Groovy:

  groovy hmdb2derby.groovy

6. open the file in PathVisio

References
----------

1. http://bridgedb.org/
2. http://hmdb.ca/
3. https://chem-bla-ics.blogspot.nl/2015/12/new-edition-getting-cas-registry.html
